Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
How and when did science fiction begin?
Well, that's a question with numerous answers.
And one major problem in answering it is that science fiction has not always been a separate
category of fiction.
Its disengagement from so-called mainstream literature is fairly recent.
Writer Elle Sprague de Camp has some thoughts on the subject.
You have to remember that at one time, imaginative fiction, that is science fiction and fantasy,
was the mainstream.
Prior to, I think it was about the year 1719, when Defoe published Robinson Crusoe, there
was, practically speaking, no such thing as realistic fiction.
There were one or two scattered exceptions, but like the first one was Don Quixote.
But by and large, practically all fiction had elements that we should recognize today
as science fiction or fantasy.
That is to say ghosts and miracles and marvelous gadgets of one kind or another.
Why the Odyssey is a science fiction and fantasy saga right there with the witch, Cersei, turning
people into pigs and the monsters, Scylla and Corridus, eating ships and so on.
The transformation of imaginative literature into what we recognize today as science fiction
occurred in the early part of this century, mostly in the pulp magazines such as Hugo
Gernsback's Amazing Stories.
Jack Williamson, who wrote for Gernsback, recalls that there was no term science fiction
when Amazing Stories began in the 20s.
When I started, my first story was printed as science fiction.
Hugo Gernsback wrote the word science and fiction together.
He invited the term science fiction in 29, I think.
And at that time, you had to explain what it was.
I used to say it was the adventure stories with the science background.
This science background was of importance to Gernsback, yet he still wanted stories with
excitement and adventure.
He preached a gospel that science fiction was sugar-coated science, that it was education.
And he got a whole panel of experts with degrees that were supposed to vet the science and
science wonder stories when he started that.
But actually, I think that was as much for him to impress the readers as anything else
because he did use true science in his stories when he could get it, but he also printed
a lot of stories that were pretty wild.
I think always in the magazine, the adventure element was more important than the science.
At first, professional writers didn't contribute much science fiction to the pulps.
The field was new, its readership was uncertain, and the rates were low.
In the beginning, they were amazing.
We filled up with reprints of classic science fiction, and the rates were so low that professional
writers didn't write for them, so they wrote new stories that were mostly written by amateurs
such as myself.
The classic science fiction Williamson mentions was worked by authors who were immensely popular
around the turn of the century and a bit earlier, such as Jules Verne, Edgar Rice Burroughs, and H.G. Wells.
But the new writers did come in a field that has yet had no definition or shape.
These new authors created the styles and themes that are the foundation of today's science fiction.
And most of them, as Williamson recalls, started out in John Campbell's astounding stories.
They all started in Campbell's magazine astounding.
He was, well, I don't know whether you'd say, Campbell discovered them or they discovered him, but it was a small group with a great deal of fellowship or fellow understanding and so forth.
And it was an exciting period and wished to be alive.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Darrell Lane.
What we today call science fiction took shape in the pages of the colorful pulp magazines of the 1920s and 30s.
Jack Williamson, who wrote for those pulp magazines, is a living history of science fiction.
His career as a writer goes back to the 1920s before the term science fiction was even created.
He grew up in the early part of this century on the frontier plains of New Mexico.
Not long after he discovered the fresh and exciting new world of science fiction, he began selling his work to Hugo Gernsback's Amazing Stories, which was the first science fiction publication.
I grew up on a sand hill farm in the south part of this county when times were pretty grim and I wanted to be some sort of scientist without any direction.
Means to get a scientific education and a few months after Gernsback started the Old Amazing, I came across some copies of it.
And I was immediately fascinated with experiments that worked with traveling time and spaceships to other worlds and all sorts of wonderful things.
And it's been an important share of my life ever since.
The pay scale for early science fiction writers was minimal.
There were no movie rights or paperback contracts.
Yet Williamson was able to produce enough fiction to make a living at it.
Gernsback paid a half a cent a word or less, which meant, well, you get $25 for a short story and 75 for an hour let.
But Clayton paid two cents a word and up, which is one reason maybe the Clayton magazine went bankrupt and great depression.
But that meant that I could pound out 4,000 words a day for two days and 160 bucks, which was a fabulous feat for a farm kid in depression days.
Amazing stories was a pulp magazine.
A pulp was printed on cheap paper.
There were usually large format magazines with lurid and colorful illustrations on the cover to catch the attention of prospective readers.
In those days, before the paperbacks and before TV and before the comics, my people read a lot more for entertainment than they do nowadays.
And there were really three sorts of magazines.
There were quality magazines like Harper's and The Old Scribner's, The Atlantic for people with brains and the slicks,
printed on coated paper that would take good advertising for people with money to spend.
And the pulp for people who had neither brains nor money.
But we had a lot of fun in the pulp, even if we were looked down upon widely.
And eventually, why science fiction got recognized as being not entirely without brains, let's say.
And nowadays, there's a little bit of money in it sometimes.
A good deal of the early science fiction published in the pulps was space opera.
The term which denotes a melodramatic form of science fiction characterized by heroes and villains, maidens in distress, and intergalactic warfare.
Right, Buck Rogers type stuff.
It's unsophisticated, but Williamson admires it, and he points at it still around in the movies.
I've never objected to space opera. I still think it's wonderful.
And I even think that Star Wars could have been made out of my legend stories, as well as it was from something else.
I enjoyed Star Wars tremendously as a sort of adolescent daydream.
And well, the pulp readers were mostly young and as naive as I was.
And the space opera was a symbolic escape from all sorts of things.
Though it does still turn up now and then, space opera was left behind in science fiction, along with Jack Williamson, moved ahead into its golden age.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
In the late 1930s, science fiction was in transition.
In one sense, it was becoming more sophisticated, outgrowing its early emphasis on space opera.
Jack Williamson, who wrote Space Opera, considers this change natural.
I was growing up and the readers were growing up. That's something that's been going on in science fiction, at least in American science fiction all along.
I think you can draw a distinction between, let's say, European mainstream science fiction on one hand, which has always been recognized and treated as literature and part of American science fiction, which was looked down on.
But as the readers of that grew older, some of them started writing, some of them started editing magazines, most of them outgrew science fiction, but some of them didn't.
So there was a continual increase in the education, the sophistication, and so forth, the whole field.
Among these readers of pulp science fiction were a few who developed into those authors whose work defined what science fiction would become in later years.
These early readers were people like Isaac Asimov, Robert Heinlein, A. E. Van Vogt, Theodore Sturgeon, L. Sprague de Camp, Frederick Poe, and Hal Clement.
And these authors are now the classics, those who wrote in that very special period of science fiction called the Golden Age.
A. E. Van Vogt, looking back at that period, says that he read the authors who were starting out then with him, but that he had no idea they were doing anything special.
Well, I read their stories, you know, I mean, I was always fascinated by these various stories. I read every issue that came out, you know, so when you say what was it like, it just seemed like a perfectly natural thing that was happening.
The notion that we were operating in a special period of time did not occur to me. You know, I mean, we were just doing our thing, and everybody was evidently stimulated in a special way.
Frederick Poe belonged to a group of writers and fans in New York called the Futurians. He remembers the closeness of the group and how they would help each other.
Well, science fiction has some special traits, and one of them is that its readers herd together as much as they can.
They formed fan clubs and associations and corresponded as groups and so on, and in New York City there were quite a few science fiction fans, and about 25 or 30, most of whom wanted to be writers, formed a club called the Futurians.
There were people like Cyril Karnbluth and Isaac Asimov, Damon Knight, and myself, quite a few others.
We did discuss each other's work a lot, and I guess in the process of criticizing it, there was a lot of help given.
I think the biggest factor that made it easier for a lot of us to go on with writing was just the knowledge that other people were doing it, and also the fact that we collaborated a lot.
We remedied each other's deficiencies by writing, I mean by collaborating on single stories, and although most of the stories were not very good, we did learn something by seeing how other people would tackle the same subjects we were writing about.
Elsprague de Camp also remembers this closeness among writers at the beginning of the Golden Age, but like VanVoote, de Camp says that the authors had no sense of participating in anything special.
Well, I daresay that various ones of us did have their greens and fancies at times, and wondered how it was all going to come out, and would this become, would the genre expand and take over the mainstream and various things of that sort.
But as to that mostly, as I said, it was simply a matter of making a living.
But the living those young writers made is the foundation of today's science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson.
No individual has left his imprint on modern science fiction as deeply as John W. Campbell.
And he didn't do it as a writer, though he did write good science fiction. He did it as an editor.
Jack Williamson, who wrote for Campbell, speaks of the qualities that made Campbell the most important editor in the history of science fiction.
I think he influenced the way nearly everybody wrote science fiction, because when he became editor of Amazing, and later changed the name to Analog, he had the best highest paying market in the field.
He was, let's say, science fiction was serious to him as a way of speculating about science and its impact on the future of mankind and so forth.
He was tremendously inventive. He was full of ideas that he shared very freely.
And everybody who was writing science fiction for those years was influenced by Campbell, it seems to me, whether directly or not.
If they weren't trying to write for him and reading his letters, they were reading such writers as O. Heinlein and Dick Kamp and Sturgeon and a dozen others who were Kamel writers.
From 1938 to 1950, Campbell edited astounding stories.
1939, his second year as the head of the magazine, was a high point in the history of science fiction.
It was in that year that Campbell published the first science fiction stories of Robert Heinlein, Theodore Sturgeon, A. E. Van Vogt and Isaac Asimov.
Williamson remembers reading their first works in astounding.
They all started in Kamel's magazine astounding.
He was, well, I don't know whether you'd say, Kamel discovered them or they discovered him, but it was, let's say, a small group with a great deal of well-fellowship or fellow understanding and so forth.
It was an exciting period and wished to be alive.
If you were a science fiction fan, it was an exciting period and wished to be alive, all right.
And John Campbell was the right man at the right time, a leader who guided, pushed, and cajoled science fiction into the modern world.
A. E. Van Vogt, one of science fiction's classic authors, recalls that he might not have ever written science fiction, if not for Campbell's encouragement.
I had read science fiction when I was 14 in the early Amazing.
However, it was, the Amazing stories was taken over from Hugo Gernsback by a man called T. O. Connor Sloan, or T. Connor O. Sloan or something like that.
And he didn't know how to edit a magazine and after he'd been editing it for a few issues, I lost interest in.
So I'd never read it again until 1938 when I picked up the issue of the astounding title in which Campbell's own story under a pseudonym was,
Who Goes There?
And when I read that story, I sent him a letter outlining an idea and he answered me.
So if he hadn't answered, I may not have had a science fiction career.
But I'd escalated it, he answered all letters like that.
In addition to encouraging authors, Campbell had helped them locate story ideas.
Frederick Cole, himself an important editor, says this was one of Campbell's greatest strengths as an editor.
Quite a few stories come to be written because an editor says, listen, you've got a notion here that you are throwing away and you really should expand it.
John Campbell was superb at that sort of thing.
Some of the best stories he published were the result of his telling a writer that he had an idea that they didn't realize he had.
John W. Campbell. Science fiction would be here even if he hadn't been, but it surely wouldn't be the same.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
Science fiction owes a debt to John W. Campbell. He brought it into the modern world and had a large hand in initiating its golden age.
During his period as editor of Astounding Stories from 1938 to 1950, Campbell discovered and encouraged writers who are now classics in the field of science fiction.
Author Jack Williamson says that Campbell's influence on an author was not heavy-handed or overly critical.
He was even supportive of ideas he didn't agree with if they happened to be good ones.
Campbell and I thought so much alike, so that I always felt at home with his magazine and enjoyed working with him.
He gave me occasional, very useful suggestions that I used and he never did edit my material,
heavily or tried to persuade me to say anything I didn't want to say.
I believe that personally he was optimistic about science in the future, but when I wrote such a pessimistic, dystopian thing as the folded hands,
he published it as it was and asked for more.
Campbell influenced his authors in different ways.
Elle Sprague de Camp, for instance, remembers him as a teacher, but not as a source of original ideas.
I learned a great deal of what I think I know about storytelling from him.
One thing that did not occur between us was his proposing story ideas and having me write them,
because I've never been very good at turning other people's ideas into effective stories.
So he may have cried it a few times, but when nothing came of it, why, I guess he quit.
I can't think of one story that he proposed and I wrote the story, but then he rejected it.
I finally sold it to one of his competitors.
That was the ghosts of Melvin Pie.
He suggested a ghost story in which the dead man had a split personality, so he had two ghosts.
One thing that Campbell would insist on in stories he bought was scientific accuracy,
the consistency with actual science and the laws of the universe.
Author Howe Clement talks about Campbell's insistence on credibility.
John was the one who bought my first several stories.
I knew him quite well, talked to him quite often.
Well, I didn't always agree with him.
We both felt that there were rules and that they ought to be followed.
We were both materialists, I guess.
We felt that the universe does run by rule and we felt that a story was most believable
when it matched those rules, at least as we mean humanity in general,
currently understood them.
Campbell was involved in publishing Clement's science fiction novel, Mission of Gravity.
Frederick Poe, who was Clement's agent at that time, tells an interesting story regarding the circumstances of its publication.
Poe sent the novel to Campbell, who rejected it.
He sent it back.
He said, pretty good stuff, but you should know, Fred, that there's a difference between a novel that reads well as a book
and a novel that reads well as a serial, and this one just does not break as a serial.
So I knew he was wrong and I knew I couldn't argue him out of it.
And so I looked at the manuscript, which was, I think, 270 pages long or something like that.
And I counted up to page 90 and drew a line under a paragraph there.
I counted up to page 180 and drew a line under a paragraph there and had my secretary retype a couple of pages on each side of each line,
saying at the bottom, the first part, end of part one, at the beginning of the second part, beginning of part two.
And I let it sit for a couple of weeks and I sent it back to John and he bought it.
Mission of Gravity, of course, went on to become one of the classic science fiction novels.
And Campbell is remembered as the greatest editor science fiction has ever had.
It is not coincidental that his time at the head of astounding stories, 1938 to 1950, is now called the Golden Age of Science Fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.